15,000-60,000 years ago:  People enter North America for the first time via the Bering Strait.


11,000 years ago: People settle the southern tip of South America.


9,000 years ago: Agriculture develops in modern-day Mexico and the Andes.


3,500 years ago: Mississippians construct the Poverty Point community in Louisiana.


~1000: The Vikings sail from Greenland to Newfoundland and establish a settlement (Vinland).


1215: The Magna Carta is signed.


1405-1433: Admiral Zheng He leads naval expeditions in the Indian Ocean.


1469: Ferdinand and Isabella marry, uniting the warring kingdoms of Aragon and Castile in Spain.


1487: Bartholomeu Dias reaches the Cape of Good Hope at Africa’s southernmost point.
1492: Spanish royalty completes the Reconquista, kicking African Muslim invaders out of Spain.
Spain orders that all Muslims and Jews must either convert to Catholicism or leave Spain.
Christopher Columbus makes landfall in the West Indies.
1493: Columbus returns to the West Indies, creating a failed settlement on Hispaniola.
1497: John Cabot reaches Newfoundland.
1498: Vasco da Gama reaches India by sailing around Africa’s southern tip.
1499-1502: Vespucci explores the coast of South America, clarifying the discovery of the New World.
1500: Pedro Cabral claims Brazil for Portugal.
1502: Nicolás de Ovando (Spain) establishes a permanent settlement on Hispaniola.


1513: Vasco Núñez de Balboa crosses Panama and sees the Pacific Ocean.
Juan Ponce de Léon enters Florida to search for slaves, wealth, and the fountain of youth.
1514: Spanish government begins to approve marriages between colonists and Indians.
1517: Martin Luther posts his Ninety-Five Theses, launching the Protestant Reformation.
1519-1522: Magellan sails around the world, encountering the Pacific islands and more.
1519: Hernán Cortés arrives at Tenochtitlán, the capital of the Aztec Empire, and conquers it.




1534: Henry VIII of England declares himself the head of the church and starts the Reformation in England.
1537: Pope Paul III outlaws Indian enslavement.
1542: Bartolomé de Las Casas writes A Very Brief Account of the Destruction of the Indies (pub. 1552).
Spain promulgates the New Laws, decreeing that Indians no longer be enslaved.


1550: Spain abolishes the encomienda system and installs the repartimiento system.


1565: Philip II of Spain authorizes Pedro Menéndez de Avilés to colonize Florida.
Spanish forts are established at St. Simons Island, Georgia, and St. Augustine.


1584: Richard Hakluyt writes A Discourse Concerning Western Planting.
1585: Sir Walter Raleigh establishes the failed settlement at Roanoke.
1588: Defeat of the Spanish Armada by England off the coast of France.


1598: Juan de Oñate leads a group north from Mexico to establish a permanent settlement in the SW.
Oñate’s party is attacked by the Acoma, resulting in Oñate capturing and massacring them.


1606: Oñate is ordered home to Spain and punished for his actions in 1598.
1607: Founding of Jamestown, Virginia.
1608: Samuel de Champlain founds Quebec.
1609: Henry Hudson sails up the Hudson River and claims the area for the Netherlands.
1610: Spain establishes Sante Fe, the first permanent European settlement in the southwest.


1618: The Virginia Company announces the headright system and creates the House of Burgesses.
1620: The Mayflower, carrying the Pilgrims, lands in modern-day Cape Cod. Plymouth is established.
1622: The Uprising of 1622 occurs, led by Opechancanough, wiping out ¼ of Virginia’s population.
The Virginia colonists organize themselves and destroy the Indians and forced treaties on them.
1624: The Dutch West India Company settles colonists on Manhattan Island.
The Virginia Company surrenders its charter, and Virginia becomes the first royal colony.
1629: The Massachusetts Bay Company is founded and obtains a charter.
1629-1642: The Great Migration of the Puritans to New England occurs.
1632: Maryland is founded as a proprietary colony by Cecilius Calvert.
1634: A group of deputies called the General Court is elected to help rule in Massachusetts.
1636: Roger Williams is banned from Massachusetts and founds Rhode Island.
Thomas Hooker founds a settlement at Hartford.
1637: Anne Hutchinson is tried in a civil court in Massachusetts.
An English fur trader is killed by the Pequots, starting the Pequot War.
1641: The General Court publishes the Body of Liberties.
1642: The English Civil War begins after Parliament accuses the Stuart kings of wrongdoing.


1649: Charles I is beheaded and the English monarchy is abolished, starting Cromwell’s reign.
Maryland adopts an Act Concerning Religion.


1660: The monarchy is restored and Charles II takes the throne.
1662: Hartford and New Haven receive a charter than unites them into Connecticut.
Puritan leaders establish the Half-Way Covenant.


1673: Jacques Marquette and Louis Joliet locate the Mississippi River.


1680: Pueblo Revolt occurs, kicking the Spanish out of New Mexico.
1681: René-Robert Cavelier reaches the Gulf of Mexico and claims the Mississippi River Valley for France.


1692: Spain reconquers New Mexico.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
1651: Parliament passes the first Navigation Act, aiming to control trade by “enumerating” colonial goods.


1660: The monarchy is restored and Charles II takes the throne.
1662: A Virginia law decrees that the status of all offspring (slave or free) depends on the mother.
1663: Charles II gives permission to eight proprietors to settle just north of Spanish Florida.
1664: The English seize New Netherland (now New York) in a global Anglo-Dutch war.


1667: The Virginia House of Burgesses rules that religious conversion does not emancipate a slave.
1669: The proprietors of Carolina issue the “Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina”.
1670: The first settlers arrive in Carolina seven years after being given permission to settle.
Virginia confines the right to vote to only landowners, not all adult men.
A Protestant uprising in Maryland unsuccessfully attempts to oust Lord Baltimore from power.


1675: An Indian alliance launches attacks on southern New England, starting King Philip’s War.
The English establish the Lords of Trade in order to oversee colonial affairs.
1676: Nathaniel Bacon leads Bacon’s Rebellion, marching to Jamestown and burning it to the ground.
Bacon is removed from power and dies in October after English warships recapture Virginia.
Virginia elite restore property voting qualifications and adopt more aggressive Indian policies.
Colonial and Iroquois forces defeat the rebelling Indians and execute Metacom, ending King Philip’s War.
1677: The “West Jersey Concessions” established an assembly and religious liberty in the West Jersey colony.
1678: The Lords of Trade learn of Massachusetts’s disobedience to the Navigation Acts.
1680: John Locke writes his Two Treatises of Government (published in 1689).
1681: William Penn establishes the proprietary colony of Pennsylvania.
1682: Penn’s “Charter of Liberty” is approved by the Pennsylvania assembly, establishing “Christian liberty”.
1683: An elected assembly in New York drafts the “Charter of Liberties and Privileges”.
1684: Charles II revokes the Massachusetts charter, citing their disobedience.
1685: King Charles II dies and is succeeded by his brother James II, a Catholic.
1686-1688: James II combines most of New England into the Dominion of New England, ruled by Andros.
1687: James II decrees religious toleration for both Protestants and Catholics.
1688: William of Orange and English aristocrats oust James II and establish Parliamentary supremacy.
English elite and Anglican church leaders rally behind William, completing the Glorious Revolution.
1689: Parliament creates the Bill of Rights, establishing control over taxation and individual rights.
Boston militia seize and jail Edmund Andros and other officials following the news of James fleeing.
A rebel militia led by Jacob Leisler forms a Committee of Safety and captures New York.
Maryland’s Protestant association overthrows Lord Baltimore’s Catholic government.
The New England colonies dissolve the Dominion and reestablish their old governments.
1690: Parliament passes the English Toleration Act, allowing all Protestants to worship freely.
1691: The crown issues a new charter that absorbs Plymouth into Massachusetts.
1692: The Salem Witch trials occur in Massachusetts.
1695: British law decrees that the government cannot censor newspapers etc. before they appeared in print.


1702: The New Jersey colony is formed by combining East and West Jersey.
1705: Virginia House of Burgesses enacts a new slave code, establishing that slaves are property.
1707: England and Scotland are united to create Great Britain in the Act of Union.


1712: A group of slaves set fire to houses and kill nine whites in New York - the first slave rebellion.
1715: Yamasee and Creek rebellions are crushed, driving any free Indians out of the Carolinas.
Proprietary power is restored to the Baltimore family after they convert to Anglicanism.
1718: The city of New Orleans is founded by the French.


1723: Virginia revokes the voting privileges of property-owning free blacks.


1728: The Pennsylvania Gazette is established in Philadelphia (and is bought by Franklin in 1729).
(1730s~1760s): First Great Awakening occurs in the colonies.
1731: A slave rebellion in Louisiana temporarily halts efforts to introduce a plantation system in the region.
Benjamin Franklin founds the first public library in Philadelphia.
1733: The colony of Georgia is founded by James Oglethorpe and a group of philanthropists.
1735: Printer John Peter Zenger is put on trial in New York and wins his libel case.
1737: Governor James Logan of Pennsylvania cheats the Lenni Lenape in the Walking Purchase.
1739: A group of South Carolina slaves seize weapons and rampage southwards in the Stono Rebellion.
George Whitefield arrives in America and begins preaching.
1741: A panic over a rumored slave uprising in New York leads to many arrests and executions.


1749: The government of Virginia awards a colossal land grant to the Ohio Company.
1751: The proprietors of Georgia surrender the colony to the crown, leading to an elected assembly.
Georgia’s bans on slaveholding, liquor, and property restriction laws are repealed.
1753: George Washington is dispatched by the governor of Pennsylvania to persuade French soldiers to leave.
1754: Washington surrenders in western Pennsylvania after being defeated soundly by the French.
An expedition led by Gen. Edward Braddock is ambushed in western Pennsylvania by the French.
Benjamin Franklin proposes the Albany Plan of Union.
1756: The Seven Years’ War begins.
1757: William Pitt becomes British Secretary of State and pours money into the Seven Years’ War.
British efforts lead to the capture of pivotal French forts in the middle ground.


1763: The Seven Years’ War is ended by the Treaty of Paris of 1763 between Great Britain and France.
France cedes Canada to Britain and receives Guadeloupe and Martinique in the Peace of Paris.
Spain obtains the Louisiana colony from France and cedes Florida to Britain for the Philippines and Cuba.
Indians in the Ohio Valley and the Great Lakes launch Pontiac’s Rebellion, besieging Detroit.
Indian revolts inspire Parliament to issue the Proclamation of 1763, banning western settlement.
1764: The Paxton Boys march on Philadelphia demanding the expulsion of Indians from the colony.
The Pennsylvania governor orders most of the Indian population to leave the colony.


1769: Father Junípero Serra founds the first Spanish mission in California in San Diego.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
1760: George III ascends to the throne.


1763: The Proclamation of 1763, issued by Parliament, causes outrage in the colonies.
1764: Parliament passes the Sugar Act, reducing the molasses tax but creating anti-smuggling measures.
Parliament passes the Currency Act, reaffirming the colonial ban on accepting paper as legal tender.
The Committee of Correspondence in Boston encourages opposition to the Sugar & Currency Acts.
1765: Parliament passes the Stamp Act, requiring that all printed material in the colonies carry a stamp.
The House of Burgesses approves four of Patrick Henry’s resolutions asserting colonial rights.
The Stamp Act Congress convenes in New York and endorses Virginia’s anti-taxation position.
Colonial merchants agree to boycott all British goods in response to the Stamp Act.
The Sons of Liberty are formed and lead protests in New York City enforcing the boycotts.
The Daughters of Liberty support the colonies by making homespun goods during boycotts.
1766: Parliament repeals the Stamp Act in response to ferocious opposition in the colonies.
Parliament passes the Declaratory Act, rejecting colonial calls of no taxation without representation.
1767: Parliament passes the Townshend Acts, imposing new taxes on imports and preventing smuggling.
The Regulators band together in the backcountry of South Carolina to protest the local government.
1768: Leaders in several colonies decide to reimpose boycotts in response to the Townshend Acts.
Royal troops are stationed in Boston after the rioting that follows the British seizure of the Liberty.
1769: Parliament removes John Wilkes from office for his scandalous writings condemning George III.
1770: The Boston Massacre occurs when British soldiers kill five Bostonians after a snowball fight.
John Adams successfully defends seven out of nine of the British soldiers involved in the Massacre.
Paul Revere stirs up outrage against the British by circulating inaccurate depictions of the Massacre.
Parliament repeals the Townshend Acts after pressure from British merchants over trade.
Americans abandon boycotts after the repeal above and the removal of troops from Boston.
1771: The Regulators in North Carolina are defeated at the Battle of Alamance by the colony’s militia.
1772: Joseph Allen delivers his incredibly popular Oration on the Beauties of Liberty in Boston.
1773: Parliament passes the Tea Act, enabling the East India Company to sell cheap tea to the colonies.
The Boston Tea Party occurs when disguised colonists throw 300 chests of tea overboard ships.
Pennsylvanian Benjamin Rush urges colonists to espouse the cause of liberty and give up slavery.
1774: Parliament passes the Intolerable Acts, closing Boston Harbor and altering the Massachusetts Charter.
Parliament allows the quartering of British soldiers in colonial homes as part of the Intolerable Acts.
Parliament passes the Quebec Act, extending the southern Canadian border and granting tolerance.
4,600 colonial militiamen line the streets of Worcester, Massachusetts, as British authorities pass by.
A convention of delegates from Massachusetts towns pass the Suffolk Resolves, urging disobedience.
The First Continental Congress convenes in Philadelphia, adopting the Continental Association.
The Continental Congress authorizes Committees of Safety to enforce and protect their trade bans.
Jefferson writes A Summary View of the Rights of British America, asserting that rights are natural.
Thomas Paine emigrates to Philadelphia from Great Britain and becomes acquainted with leaders.
1775: Patrick Henry delivers an address to a Virginia convention, urging it to begin military preparations.
The Battles of Lexington and Concord occur in May, beginning the Revolutionary War.
The Second Continental Congress convenes and names George Washington commander of the army.
Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold surround Fort Ticonderoga in New York and force its surrender.
British forces dislodge colonial troops from Breed’s Hill, Boston, in the Battle of Bunker Hill.
Britain declares the colonies to be in a state of rebellion and dispatches thousands of troops.
Lord Dunmore of Virginia issues his proclamation, offering freedom to any slave that defected.
1776: Thomas Paine publishes his famous pamphlet Common Sense, galvanizing the revolutionary spirit.
Adam Smith publishes The Wealth of Nations in England, suggesting economic independence.
The arrival of American cannon in Boston forces British General Sir William Howe to leave the city.
Abigail Adams writes her famous letter to her husband urging him to “remember the ladies.”
John Adams publishes his Thoughts on Government, advocating for a ‘balanced government’ (wealth).
New Jersey adopts a new state constitution, granting suffrage to all who met a property requirement.
The Continental Congress declares colonial autonomy and approves the Declaration of Independence.
Pennsylvania adopts a new state constitution institutionalizing democracy through a unicameral system.
Sir William Howe forces Washington out of New York City and almost cuts off Washington’s retreat.
Washington successfully executes his famous surprise attack at Trenton after crossing the Delaware.
Lemuel Haynes publishes his essay urging Americans to extend their conception of freedom to blacks.
1777: Washington rescinds his ban on black recruits in response to Lord Dunmore’s 1775 proclamation.
Washington wins a significant victory via a surprise attack at Princeton, continuing to restore morale.
New York adopts a new state constitution, establishing complete religious freedom for the first time.
Vermont adopts a new state constitution abolishing slavery - a landmark moment.
A second British army led by General Burgoyne advances, hoping to isolate New England with Howe.
Sir William Howe leaves New York to capture Philadelphia, forcing the Continental Congress to flee.
General Burgoyne, having been abandoned by Howe, is defeated at Saratoga by American forces.
1778: Rhode Island forms a black regiment promising freedom and compensating owners for their loss.
Fighting halts as Howe’s army winters at Philadelphia, while Washington’s stays at Valley Forge.
Benjamin Franklin agrees the Treaty of Amity and Commerce with France, adding a new ally.
British forces in the southern colonies capture Savannah, Georgia, in December.
1779: John Jay negotiates the Treaty of Aranjuez with Spain, who agreed to ally with France.
Washington dispatches General John Sullivan to raze Iroquois establishments.
Jefferson draws up his Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom, separating church and state.
Due to sky-high inflation, the Congress urges states to adopt measures to fix the prices of goods.
Attempts to fix prices by a Committee of Safety are met with spirited opposition from colonial merchants.
1780: British forces led by General Henry Clinton captures the city of Charleston and an American army.
British Lord Charles Cornwallis routs an American army at Camden, South Carolina.
Colonial officer Benedict Arnold defects and almost succeeds in turning over West Point to the British.
The House of Burgesses passes a law rewarding war veterans with 300 acres and a slave.
1781: American forces under Daniel Morgan defeat Gen. Banastre Tarleton at Cowpens, South Carolina.
American General Nathanael Greene inflicts heavy losses on Cornwallis, forcing him back to Yorktown.
Washington, Lafayette, and the French navy trap Cornwallis at Yorktown, forcing his surrender.
Peace negotiations begin following Cornwallis’s official surrender in October.
1782: Deborah Sampson disguises herself as a man and enlists in the Continental Army.
1783: The American Revolution is ended by the Treaty of Paris of 1783 between Britain and America.
Adams, Franklin, and Jay gain control of all the land east of the Mississippi for America.
Britain cedes fishing rights in the northeast off the shore of Canada to America.
America agrees to refrain from persecuting Loyalists and vows to restore their property.
1784: A group of New Yorkers emancipate a shipment of new indentured servants on the grounds of liberty.


1786: The Virginia House of Burgesses adopts Jefferson’s Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ


1777: The Articles of Confederation are first drafted and adopted by the Continental Congress. 


1781: The Articles of Confederation are ratified by all thirteen states.
1782: Hector St. John de Crévecoeur publishes his Letters from an American Farmer in France. 


1784: Jefferson drafts the Ordinance of 1784, dividing the west into districts that would be future states.
A peace conference held at Fort Stanwix, New York, results in a large surrender of Indian land. 
1785: A peace conference held at Fort McIntosh, Pennsylvania, leads to more Indian land cession. 
The Ordinance of 1785 is passed, setting rates and regulating land sales in the Old Northwest. 
Jefferson publishes his book Notes on the State of Virginia, in which he rendered blacks disloyal. 
1786: Shays’s Rebellion occurs in western Massachusetts when angry farmers close the local courts.
Delegates from six states meet in Annapolis to debate and call for a gathering to amend the Articles.
1787: The Constitutional Convention meets for the first time in Philadelphia to discuss a new government.
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 is passed, calling for more states and clarifying frontier policy.
The Constitution is signed by 39 delegates and is sent to the states for ratification on September 17.
Benjamin Franklin agrees to serve as the president of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society.
1788: The Federalist, a series of 85 essays on government, is published by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay. 
The Constitution is ratified by nine states, and officially becomes the new frame of government. 
1789: George Washington is sworn in as president and delivers his renowned inaugural address. 
The French Revolution begins in France, causing a stir and renewed debates in the United States.
1790: Congress passes the Naturalization Act, extending the residency requirement for citizenship.
Jefferson brokers a deal between Madison and Hamilton to pass the financial plan through Congress.
Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton proposes his five-step financial program to the nation.
Judith Sargent Murray publishes her influential essay “On the Equality of the Sexes” in America.
1791: The Haitian Revolution begins in Saint Domingue as slave rebellion led by Toussaint L’Ouverture.
Little Turtle of the Miami Confederacy heavily defeats American forces in Ohio led by Arthur St. Claire.
¾ of the states ratify the Bill of Rights, making the first ten amendments to the Constitution. 
Alexander Hamilton delivers his Report on Manufactures (calling for a tariff) to Congress.
1792: George Washington unanimously wins reelection to the presidency.
Mary Wollstonecraft publishes her pamphlet A Vindication of the Rights of Woman in England.
1793: King Louis XIV and French aristocrats are executed, and war breaks out between France and Britain.
Washington issues a proclamation of American neutrality concerning the war in Europe. 
Congress passes a fugitive slave law in order to fulfill the appropriate promise made in the Constitution.
1794: American troops under Anthony Wayne force surrender on Little Turtle at the Battle of Fallen Timbers.
Jay’s Treaty is signed, giving priority to British imports while the British vacated frontier forts.
The Whiskey Rebellion breaks out in the Pennsylvania backcountry over the federal whiskey tax.
Washington marches out with 13,000 men and quells the Whiskey Rebellion himself.
1795: The Indians and America negotiate the Treaty of Greenville, forcing the cession of Indian land.
Pinckney negotiates the Treaty of San Lorenzo with Spain, allowing trade through New Orleans.
1796: Washington decides to retire at the end of his second term and delivers his famous Farewell Address.
Adams and his running mate Pinckney defeat Jefferson and Burr (71-68) in the Election of 1796.
1797: John Adams is sworn in as the second president and delivers his inaugural address.
An American diplomatic delegation is sent to Paris to renegotiate the alliance of 1778 with France.
Adams releases French negotiation bribe demands, and the event is dubbed the XYZ Affair.
1798: Following continued grievances at sea Congress rescinds French treaties, beginning the Quasi-War.
Congress passes the Alien and Sedition Acts, giving Adams the power to deport and censor.
Jefferson writes the Kentucky Resolution, claiming that the states can nullify unconstitutional laws.
Madison pens the Virginia Resolution, calling for the federal courts to defend freedom of speech.
1799: A crowd led by John Fries breaks angry farmers out of Pennsylvania jails and violently protests taxes.
George Washington passes away at his home on Mount Vernon. 
1800: Jefferson and his running mate Burr defeat Adams and Pinckney (73-65) in the Election of 1800.
Gabriel’s Rebellion is put down in Richmond after the hanging of the 26 conspiring slaves.
1801: Thomas Jefferson is sworn in as the third president and delivers his inaugural address.
Jefferson refuses to pay ransoms to the pasha of Tripoli, launching the Barbary Wars.


1803: John Marshall establishes judicial review on the case Marbury v. Madison.
Thomas Jefferson completes the Louisiana Purchase from France.
Fighting resumes again between Britain and France following a British declaration of war.
1804: American forces win a battle at Tripoli harbor, ending the Barbary Wars in victory.
Jefferson dispatches an expedition led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to explore the territory.
Jefferson wins a sweeping reelection to the presidency, defeating Pinckney (162-14).


1806: Virginia creates a new slave law requiring all freed slaves to either leave the state or re-enter slavery.
Lewis and Clark return from their travels, bearing an immense amount of information about the west.
The British Royal Navy resumes the practice of impressment of American ships in the Atlantic.
1807: Jefferson enacts the Embargo, banning all ships sailing to foreign ports in hopes of gaining leverage.
1808: Congress bans the importation of slaves to America on the first day possible for the ban to be placed. 
Madison and his running mate Clinton defeat Pinckney and King (122-47) in the Election of 1808.
Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa found the village of Prophetstown in Indiana.
1809: Jefferson signs the Non-Intercourse Act, banning trade only with France and Britain.
James Madison is sworn in as the fourth president and delivers his inaugural address.
1810: The power of judicial review is extended to state laws on the case Fletcher v. Peck.
Congress passes Macon’s Bill No. 2, resuming trade but inserting an embargo clause.
Tecumseh travels across the Mississippi Valley calling for attacks on American settlements.
1811: American forces under William Henry Harrison destroy Prophetstown at the Battle of Tippecanoe.
1812: Madison reimposes the embargo on British trade following continued attacks in the Atlantic.
America declares war on Britain after a Congress majority vote, starting the War of 1812.
The American frigate Constitution defeats the British warship Guerriere off the coast of Canada.
Madison wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent Dewitt Clinton (128-89).
1813: American Commodore Oliver Perry defeats a British naval force on Lake Erie.
Tecumseh is defeated by William Henry Harrison at the Battle of the Thames near Detroit.
1814: British forces invade Washington D.C., burning the White House to the ground.
Fort McHenry famously withstands a British bombing at Baltimore harbor.
An American army under Andrew Jackson defeats the Red Sticks at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend.
The Treaty of Ghent is signed, ending the War of 1812 and restoring the status quo.
Federalists complain about grievances and suggest disunion at the Hartford Convention.
1815: Andrew Jackson and his forces stave off a strong British invasion in New Orleans.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ


(1790s~1840s): The Second Great Awakening occurs in the United States.
1790: Samuel Slater establishes America’s first factory at Pawtucket, Rhode Island.


1793: Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin, revolutionizing American slavery and the economy.


1806: Congress authorizes the construction of the National Road from Maryland to the Old Northwest.
1807: Robert Fulton’s steamboat, the Clermont, navigates the Hudson upstream to Albany.
1808: Congress prohibits the Atlantic slave trade on the first day allowed by the Constitution.


(1810~1822): Spain’s Latin American colonies rise in rebellion and create a series of independent nations.
1810: American residents of West Florida rebel against Spanish authorities and seize Baton Rouge.
1811: The original Bank of the United States expires, leaving the country without uniform currency.
The first commercial steamboat plies the waters of the Mississippi down to New Orleans.


1814: The Boston Associates create a large-scale American weaving factory at Waltham, Massachusetts.
1815: President James Madison proposes the American System in his yearly address to Congress.
1816: Congress enacts the tariff of 1816, offering protection to manufactured goods produced in America.
The Second Bank of the United States is created with a twenty year charter from Congress.
Richard Allen found the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
Monroe and his running mate Tompkins defeat King and Howard (183-34) in the Election of 1816.
(1817~1825): The Era of Good Feelings occurs in the United States.
1817: President James Madison vetoes Calhoun’s internal improvements bill after initially supporting it.
James Monroe is sworn in as the fifth president and delivers his inaugural address.
1818: Andrew Jackson leads troops into East Florida and creates a crisis by killing foreign traders.
1819: The Panic of 1819 begins following economic failures due to a lowered European demand for goods.
Congress receives a request from Missouri to draft a constitution in preparation for joining the union.
Marshall defines corporate charters as immutable contracts in Dartmouth College v. Woodward.
Representative James Tallmadge proposes the prohibition of further slavery in Missouri.
Spain sells Florida to America in the Adams-Onís Treaty, negotiated by John Quincy Adams.
Marshall declares the Second Bank’s creation legal by the Constitution in McCulloch v. Maryland.
(1820s~1830s): The market revolution occurs in the United States.
1820: Senator Jesse Thomas’s Missouri Compromise is adopted by Congress, settling the debate.
Monroe wins unopposed reelection to the presidency (231-1).


1822: The Monroe administration becomes the first government to diplomatically recognize Latin America.
1823: Marshall proclaims that Indians occupied rather than owned their land in Johnson v. M’Intosh.
James Monroe delivers his famous address to Congress including the Monroe Doctrine.
1824: The Supreme Court strikes down a steamboat monopoly in New York in Gibbons v. Ogden.
Andrew Jackson’s lack of a majority in the Election of 1824 leaves the decision to the House.
1825: Henry Clay defers his support to John Quincy Adams, believing that Adams is the right candidate.
Adams and his running mate Calhoun defeat Jackson and Calhoun in the House run-off.
John Quincy Adams is sworn in as the sixth president and delivers his inaugural address.
The Erie Canal, a 363-mile long canal connecting New York to the Great Lakes, is completed.
John Quincy Adams sets forth an ambitious plan for internal improvements and economic progress.
Senator Martin Van Buren begins organizing the new Democratic party in preparation for 1828.


1828: The tariff of 1828 (called the ‘tariff of abominations’ in the South) is passed by Congress.
Outrage breaks out in the South over the tariff on manufactures, beginning the nullification debate.
Work begins on the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, the nation’s first commercial railroad.
The first Workingmen’s Party is created in Philadelphia, seeking to create support for labor rights.
Jackson and his running mate Calhoun defeat Adams and Rush (178-83) in the Election of 1828.
John C. Calhoun secretly drafts South Carolina’s Exposition and Protest, justifying nullification.
1829: Andrew Jackson is sworn in as the seventh president and delivers his inaugural address.
Armed white mobs assemble in Cincinnati, attacking blacks and destroying their homes and businesses.
1830: Daniel Webster delivers his famous argument against nullification on the floor of the Senate.
Jackson passes the Indian Removal Act, providing funds for the uprooting of tribes in the south.
Charles Grandison Finney holds his most famous religious revival in Rochester, New York.
Joseph Smith founds the Church of the Latter-Day Saints and publishes the Book of Mormon.
1831: Marshall declares Indians as “wards” of the government in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia.
Cyrus McCormick invents the reaper, greatly increasing the output of wheat farmers.
Alexis de Tocqueville lands in America for his tour to study American prisons.
1832: The Supreme Court recognizes the right of Indians to be politically separate in Worcester v. Georgia.
Nicholas Biddle’s allies pass a bill extending the Bank’s lifetime through Congress.
Andrew Jackson vetoes the Bank extension bill, refusing to sacrifice the common man for the wealthy.
Congress passes the tariff of 1832, reducing some of the measures introduced by the tariff of 1828.
The state of South Carolina declares the tariff of 1832 null and void within the state.
Jackson wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent Clay (219-49).
1833: Jackson engineers the passage of the Force Bill in Congress, allowing him to militarily enforce duties.
Clay and Calhoun pass the tariff of 1833 in Congress, further reducing the duties from 1832.
South Carolina rescinds its order of nullification, but proceeds to nullify the Force Bill.
1834: Lyman Beecher delivers his sermon “A Plea for the West”, warning of Catholic intentions in the west.
The young mill women at Lowell walk off their jobs to protest wage reduction (and again two years later).
1835: The Second Seminole War begins after Seminole resistance to the Indian Removal Act in Florida.
Twenty New York tailors are convicted of conspiracy following their request for higher wages.
Alexis de Tocqueville publishes Democracy in America, documenting the importance of democracy.
John Marshall dies, leading to the appointment of Roger B. Taney to the post of Chief Justice.
Andrew Jackson finishes paying off the last of the American national debt.
1836: The Boston Associates build many modern textile factories in Lowell, just outside of Boston.
The value of currency skyrockets, prices rise, and real wages decline due to a lack of bank regulation.
Land speculators buy 20 million acres of federal land using paper currency of dubious value.
Jackson issues the Specie Circular, declaring that only gold and silver would be accepted for land.
The Bank of England follows Jackson’s decree, only allowing gold and silver for the paying of debts.
An economic downturn occurs in Britain, lowering their demand for American grown cotton.
Van Buren, Johnson defeat Harrison, Granger and White, Tyler (170-73-26) in the Election of 1836.
1837: The Panic of 1837 begins, leading to the failures of businesses and losses of jobs and land.
Martin Van Buren is sworn in as the eighth president and delivers his inaugural address.
The Van Buren administration announces its intentions to remove money from the pet banks.
Taney rules in favor of Massachusetts allowing construction competition despite a contract.
John Deere invents the steel plow, making it easier for settlers to subdue the western prairies.
1838: Indians begin forcibly leaving Georgia, following the Trail of Tears to their new lands in Oklahoma.
1839: Joseph Smith and his followers settle in Nauvoo, Illinois, after being kicked out of previous settlements.
1840: Congress approves Van Buren’s Independent Treasury, separating the government from the bank.
Orestes Brownson argues for a radical social change for equality in his essay “The Laboring Classes”.
Harrison and his running mate Tyler defeat Martin Van Buren (234-60) in the Election of 1840.
1841: William Henry Harrison is sworn in as the ninth president and delivers his inaugural address.
Harrison dies one month after taking office due to a case of severe pneumonia.
John Tyler succeeds Harrison and delivers his “Address Upon Assuming the Office of P.O.T.U.S.”.
Residents of Rhode Island meet at the People’s Convention and draft a new state constitution.
President John Tyler sends troops to quell the insurrection in Rhode Island, resulting in the Dorr War.


1844: The telegraph, invented by Samuel Morse, is put into commercial action for the first time.
1845: John O’Sullivan declares the idea of ‘manifest destiny’ in his essay “Annexation”.
The Irish Potato Famine begins, resulting in millions of Irish immigrants entering America. 


1847: Following Joseph Smith’s murder three years prior, Brigham Young leads the Mormons to Utah.


1854: Henry David Thoreau publishes Walden, recounting his experiences and criticizing the market revolution.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ


1811: Hundreds of Louisiana sugar plantation slaves incite an uprising and march armed to New Orleans.
Militia and state troops shut down the rebellion in a battle, resulting in sixty-six casualties.


1815: Robert Owen’s New Lanark community in Scotland reaches its peak, becoming a major manufacturer.
1816: The American Bible Society is founded with the intention of promoting religious virtue among settlers.
Proponents of the deportation of slaves to Africa found the American Colonization Society.
1817: Nearly three thousand free blacks gather in Philadelphia, opposing colonization and asserting equality.


1822: Liberia is founded as a West African outpost for freed slaves to settle in following their manumission.
Denmark Vesey’s plot to start a slave revolt is uncovered by South Carolina officials and he is hanged.


1824: Robert Owen creates the New Harmony community in Indiana, emphasizing equality and common good.
1825: Concerned eastern religious groups found the American Tract Society to spread Protestant literature.
1826: The American Temperance society is founded, aiming to ‘redeem’ drunkards and renounce liquor.
1827: Samuel Cornish helps to establish America’s first black newspaper, Freedom’s Journal.


1829: David Walker publishes An Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World, calling on blacks to mobilize.


1831: William Lloyd Garrison publishes the first issue of The Liberator, a weekly journal for abolition.
Nat Turner and his followers rampage through Virginia, killing sixty whites before being captured.
Parliament announces a program for abolishing slavery throughout the empire (concluding in 1838).
1832: The Virginia legislature passes a variety of reaction laws further restraining the rights of slaves.
Garrison publishes his pamphlet Thoughts on African Colonization, advocating for slave integration.
The Free Woman, a Parisian journal promoting the rights of women, is established in France.
1833: Parliament passes the Slavery Abolition Act, ending slavery within the British empire.
Lydia Maria Child publishes An Appeal in Favor of That Class of Americans Called Africans.
The American Anti-Slavery Society is founded by William Lloyd Garrison and Arthur Tappan.


1836: The House of Representatives passes the ‘gag rule’ in response to the flood of abolitionist petitions.
1837: Antislavery editor Elijah Lovejoy is killed while defending his printing press by a mob in Alton, Illinois.
1838: A Philadelphia mob burns down Pennsylvania Hall, a frequent host of abolitionist lectures.
Abolitionist and womens’ rights reformer Abby Kelley delivers her first lecture in Lynn, Massachusetts.
Sarah Grimké publishes her Letters on the Equality of the Sexes, calling for rights and questioning pay.
1839: Slaves commandeer the slave ship the Amistad and are captured off the coast of Long Island.
The state of Mississippi enacts the first laws shielding the property of married women.
1840: The Shaker society reaches its peak, featuring nineteen branches from New England to Kentucky.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott are refused entry to the World Anti-Slavery Convention.
Abolitionist factions split over the role of women in the movement following Kelley’s appointment.
The American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society is created, taking up an anti-female stance.
The Liberty Party is formed out of the desire to make abolitionism a political movement.
The Liberty Party nominates James G. Birney as its presidential candidate in the election of 1840.
1841: The Supreme Court rules that the Amistad slaves be returned on United States v. The Amistad.
Virginia slaves seize the Creole and sail to the Bahamas, where they find refuge among the British.


1844: John Quincy Adams facilitates the repeal of the ‘gag rule’ in the House of Representatives.
Margaret Fuller becomes the literary editor of the New York Tribune - the first woman to hold the post.
1845: Fuller publishes Woman in the Nineteenth Century, combining transcendentalism with the movement.


1848: Stanton and Mott organize and hold the Seneca Falls Convention in upstate New York.
Stanton raises the issue of women’s suffrage and publishes the Declaration of Sentiments.
John Humphrey Noyes founds the Oneida community in New York, preaching “complex marriage”.
1849: Harriet Tubman escapes north to Philadelphia and commits herself to the rescue of slaves.


1851: Sojourner Truth delivers her famous speech repudiating female delicacy at a women’s rights convention.
1852: Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes Uncle Tom’s Cabin, portraying slaves as innocent victims.
Frederick Douglass delivers his oration “What, to the Slave, is the Fourth of July?” in Rochester.


1855: A court in Missouri tries a slave, Celia, for the murder of her master and sentences her to death.


1860: New York passes a law allowing married women to sign contracts, manage property, and retain wages.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
1820: Moses Austin receives a large land grant to settle Spanish Texas with American settlers.
1821: Mexico gains independence from Spain in the Treaty of Córdoba.


1830: The Mexican government annuls American land contracts and bans future emigration in Texas.


1835: Mexican ruler General Antonio López de Santa Anna sends an army into Texas to enforce authority.
1836: Santa Anna’s army storms the Alamo missionary compound in Texas, killing 187 defenders.
Texan forces under Sam Houston route Santa Anna’s forces at the Battle of San Jacinto.
The Texan rebels force Santa Anna to recognize their independence in the Treaties of Velasco.
1837: The Texas Congress calls for entry into the union, but Jackson and Van Buren avoid the question.


1844: Sec. of State John C. Calhoun’s letter suggesting Texas’s slavery contribution is leaked to the press.
Henry Clay and Martin Van Buren resolve to reject Texan annexation fearing war with Mexico.
Polk and his running mate Dallas defeat Clay and Frelinghuysen (170-105) in the Election of 1844.
The Baptist and Methodist evangelical churches divide into northern and southern branches.
1845: Congress declares Texas part of the United States, completing the process of annexation.
James K. Polk is sworn in as the eleventh president and delivers his inaugural address.
1846: American forces under Taylor move into disputed territory between the Nueces and Rio Grande.
Polk calls for a declaration of war on Mexico, claiming that they had “shed blood on American soil”.
Congress passes a resolution declaring war on Mexico, starting the Mexican-American War.
The United States and Britain sign the Treaty of Oregon, dividing Oregon at the 49th parallel.
American insurrectionists under Capt. John C. Frémont proclaim California free from Mexico.
The U.S. Navy raises the American flag in California after capturing Monterey and San Francisco.
American troops under Gen. Stephen Kearney occupy Sante Fe and end uprisings in California.
Henry David Thoreau is jailed in Massachusetts after refusing to pay taxes in protest of the war.
Congress resolves another of Polk’s goals by passing the Walker Tariff Act, lowering the tariff.
Congress passes the Independent Treasury Act, reestablishing the Independent Treasury.
Rep. David Wilmot proposes the Wilmot Proviso, proposing the banning of slavery in the Cession.
Alfred Robinson famously advocates for Californian annexation in his Life in California.
1847: Gen. Zachary Taylor’s forces defeat Santa Anna’s army at the Battle of Buena Vista.
Polk orders Winfield Scott to march from Veracruz to Mexico City after Mexico’s refusal to negotiate.
Winfield Scott’s forces route Mexican defenders and seize the Mexican capital in September.
Representative Abraham Lincoln introduces his “Spot Resolutions” to Congress, but it is ignored.
1848: Gold is discovered at Johann Sutter’s mill in California, triggering the California Gold Rush.
America and Mexico sign the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, ending the Mexican-American War.
Mexico cedes California and present-day New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, and Utah to America.
Opponents of the expansion of slavery organize the Free Soil Party and nominate Van Buren.
Taylor, Fillmore defeat Cass, Butler and Van Buren, C. F. Adams (163-127-0) in the Election of 1848.
1849: Zachary Taylor is sworn in as the twelfth president and delivers his inaugural address.
Thoreau publishes his famous essay “On Civil Disobedience,” preaching nonviolent resistance.
1850: California submits a proposal to Congress requesting entry into the United States as a free state.
Sen. Henry Clay offers the Compromise of 1850, including four heavily debated main provisions.
Zachary Taylor suddenly dies of an intestinal infection in July, leaving the debate in the balance.
Millard Fillmore is sworn in as the thirteenth president and delivers his “First Annual Message”.
Fillmore breaks the Congressional impasse and facilitates the passage of the Compromise of 1850.
Congress passes the Fugitive Slave Act, placing federal agents in the North and causing outrage.
1851: A crowd of New York protestors rescue the slave Jerry from Syracuse jail and send him to Canada.
A slave owner who attempted to recapture a fugitive is killed by a mob in Christiana, Pennsylvania.
1852: Pierce and his running mate King defeat Scott and Graham (254-42) in the Election of 1852.
1853: Franklin Pierce is sworn in as the fourteenth president and delivers his inaugural address.
American warships under Commodore Matthew Perry sail into Tokyo Harbor to negotiate with Japan.
Perry presents his technologies, armaments, and arts, impressing the Japanese leadership.
1854: Sen. Stephen Douglas introduces a bill to provide territorial governments for Kansas and Nebraska.
Antislavery Congressmen issue their Appeal of the Independent Democrats, condemning the bill.
The Republican Party is founded at an anti-expansion meeting in Ripon, Wisconsin.
Japan opens two ports to American trade, providing America with fueling stops on the way to China.
Stephen Douglas engineers the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in Congress.
America and Mexico finalize the Gadsden Purchase, permanently defining the Mexico border.
Pierre Soulé persuades other ministers to sign the Ostend Manifesto, calling for the seizure of Cuba.
The Know-Nothing Party sweeps the Massachusetts state elections on a nativist platform.
1855: Hundreds of proslavery Missourians illegally vote in the 1855 Kansas elections on slavery.
Pierce recognizes the resulting pro-slavery government, but settlers form a rival free government.
A proslavery mob assaults the free-soil stronghold of Lawrence, burning buildings and homes.
Rep. Preston Brooks beats Sen. Charles Sumner unconscious on the Senate floor with a cane.
John Brown and eight accomplices kill five pro-slavery men on the banks of Pottawatomie Creek.
The Whig Party collapses after it is unable to form a unified response to the slavery crisis.
1856: The major parties reorient themselves along sectional lines, largely splitting the North and South.
Buchanan, Breckinridge defeat Frémont, Dayton and Fillmore, Donelson (174-114-8) in the Election of 1856.
1857: James Buchanan is sworn in as the fifteenth president and delivers his inaugural address.
Taney rules that only whites can be citizens and prohibits territorial slavery in Dred Scott v. Sandford.
Buchanan announces that slavery henceforth exists in all the territories.
1858: Buchanan attempts to admit Kansas as a slave state under the Lecompton Constitution.
Sen. Stephen Douglas, outraged by the violation of popular sovereignty, blocks the measure.
Upon accepting his nomination for the Senate, Lincoln delivers his famous “House Divided” speech.
Tens of thousands of listeners attend the Lincoln-Douglas debates in their Illinois Senate race.
The Democrats narrowly emerge victorious in the state and elect Stephen Douglas to the Senate.
1859: John Brown is captured and hanged after an arms raid on the town of Harpers Ferry, Virginia.
1860: Seven states of the Deep South demand that the Democrats protect slavery in the territories.
Delegates from the seven Deep South states leave the Democrat convention, upset over slavery.
Northern Democrats proceed to nominate Douglas, while the rebels nominate Breckinridge.
The Republicans convene in the North and nominate Lincoln while adding economics to their platform.
Sen. John J. Crittenden and other former Whigs found the Constitutional Union Party.
Lincoln, Hamlin defeat Breckinridge, Lane, Bell, Everett, and Douglas, Johnson (180-72-39-12).
Sen. John J. Crittenden offers the Crittenden Compromise, which would enshrine slavery.
South Carolina issues its Declaration of the Immediate Causes of Secession and secedes.
1861: The first seven seceding states form the Confederate States of America on February 8th.
The Confederacy adopts a Constitution and elects Jefferson Davis to the presidency.
Abraham Lincoln is sworn in as the sixteenth president and delivers his famous inaugural address.
Alexander Stephens, Confederate vice president, delivers his infamous Cornerstone Speech.
Jefferson Davis orders batteries to fire on Fort Sumter after Lincoln shipped supplies there. 
Lincoln proclaims that a Southern insurrection has begun and calls for 75,000 volunteer troops.
Virginia, Arkansas, North Carolina, and Tennessee secede and join the Confederacy.
Lincoln orders a naval blockade of the South, although it isn’t immediately effective.
The United States Sanitary Commission is founded in order to generate troop donations for the Union.
The Army of the Potomac is forced into a retreat by the Confederates at the First Battle of Bull Run.
John C. Frémont prohibits slavery in Missouri, only to be swiftly rescinded by Lincoln.
Abraham Lincoln appoints George B. McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac.
The Union adopts Gen. Benjamin F. Butler’s plan of treating slaves as contraband of war.
The Union navy occupies South Carolina’s Sea Islands, and immigrants begin to arrive.
1862: Ulysses Grant’s forces capture Forts Henry and Donelson in Tennessee in the Western theater.
McClellan leads the Army into Northern Virginia after mounting pressure from Republicans.
The Monitor and the Merrimac clash at the Battle of Hampton Roads - the first ironclad battle.
Congress prohibits the Union army from returning any fugitive slaves to the Confederates.
Grant withstands a surprise attack and defeats Confederate forces at Shiloh, Tennessee.
Abraham Lincoln signs the Emancipation Act, abolishing slavery in the District of Columbia.
Union Adm. David Farragut storms and captures the stronghold of New Orleans by sea.
Gen. Johnston and Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia repel McClellan during the Seven Days’ Campaign.
Lincoln signs the Revenue Act of 1862, implementing the first functioning income tax.
The Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroad companies are chartered by Congress.
Congress passes the Land Grant College Act, assisting states in establishing colleges.
Congress passes the Second Confiscation Act, liberating slaves from Union owners and fugitives.
Lincoln meets with a delegation of black leaders to promote emigration and colonization.
Gen. Robert E. Lee defeats Union forces under Gen. John Pope at the Second Battle of Bull Run.
Lee, looking to capitalize on Union losses and demoralization, leads his forces north into Maryland.
McClellan’s Army of the Potomac repels Lee at the Battle of Antietam - the bloodiest day of the war.
Lincoln issues the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, warning of abolition in the new year.
Lincoln signs a deal with a shady entrepreneur to settle former slaves on an island near Haiti.
Union Gen. Grant’s forces lay siege to Vicksburg, Mississippi, following the failure of direct attacks.
Lincoln pardons all but 38 Sioux aggressors, leading to the largest mass execution in American history.
1863: Lincoln signs the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing slaves in areas not firmly under Union control.
Through the Emancipation Proclamation, Lincoln allows the enlistment of black soldiers.
The Homestead Act takes effect, offering 160 acres of free public land to western settlers.
Food riots break out in Richmond, Virginia, where large crowds of women plundered supplies.
Union Gen. Joe Hooker assumes control of the Army of the Potomac and marches into Virginia.
Lee’s army defeats Hooker’s forces at the Battle of Chancellorsville, forcing him back to Maryland.
Union Gen. Lorenzo Thomas raises fifty regiments of black troops in the Mississippi Valley.
Robert E. Lee opts to go on the offensive, leading troops north in hopes of destroying morale.
Union Gen. George Meade meets Lee’s forces at Gettysburg, where the two fight for three days.
Lee is defeated and flees back to Virginia following the failure of Pickett’s Charge on July 3rd.
The city of Vicksburg surrenders to Gen. Grant’s siege, leaving the Mississippi Valley to the Union.
The Union army outlines a new contract plantation labor system for emancipated slaves.
Four days of rioting occur in New York City over the Union draft, mainly led by Irish mobs.
Col. Robert G. Shaw’s Massachusetts 54th Volunteers lead a famous attack at Fort Wagner.
Another Confederate bread riot erupts in Mobile, Alabama, where a crowd steals army supplies.
Lincoln delivers his famous Gettysburg Address, succinctly summarizing the war’s meaning.
Lincoln announces his Ten-Percent Plan of Reconstruction to Congress.
1864: Congress passes the Wade-Davis Bill proposing a harsher Reconstruction plan, but it dies.
Abraham Lincoln appoints Gen. Ulysses S. Grant as commander of the Army of the Potomac.
Lincoln urges the governor of Union Louisiana to partially enfranchise blacks in a letter.
Confederate Nathan B. Forrest’s troops massacre black soldiers post-surrender at Fort Pillow.
Union Gen. Grant crosses the Rapidan River and begins the Overland Campaign against Lee.
Lee beats Grant to Petersburg, leading to Grant’s forces settling in for a long siege.
Congress passes an act granting black soldiers retroactive equal pay for their service.
Union Gen. William Sherman moves his troops from Georgia into Tennessee, encountering resistance.
Union troops in the Southwest force the Navajo into reservations, leading to the Navajo’s Long Walk.
Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman finally captures Atlanta, seizing Georgia’s main rail center.
Roger B. Taney dies, leading to the appointment of Samuel P. Chase to the post of Chief Justice.
The Radical Republicans abandon Lincoln and nominate John C. Frémont on a platform of abolition.
John C. Frémont drops out of the race, fearing that he will split the Republican vote too much.
Lincoln wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent McClellan (212-21).
Gen. Sherman and his army set out on his March to the Sea, razing a 60-mile wide path.
1865: Union Gen. Sherman’s forces capture Savannah and continue rampaging through South Carolina.
Congress approves the Thirteenth Amendment, abolishing slavery throughout the Union.
Lincoln calls for reconciliation with the South in his second inaugural address.
The Confederate Congress authorizes the arming of slaves to fight following Lee’s approval.
Gen. Grant finally breaks through at Petersburg, forcing Lee’s abandonment of Richmond.
Union soldiers occupy the Confederate capital and Lincoln walks through Richmond.
Lee surrenders to Grant’s army at Appomattox Courthouse, Virginia, on April 9th.
Lincoln calls for limited black suffrage throughout the Union in his final speech.
Lincoln is shot and killed by John Wilkes Booth at Ford’s Theatre in Washington, D.C.
Andrew Johnson is sworn in as the seventeenth president and delivers his inaugural address.
1866: The Supreme Court rules it illegal to hold military tribunals near civil courts in Ex parte Milligan.


1869: The transcontinental railroad is completed, expanding and connecting the national market.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
1865: Gen. Sherman and Sec. of War Stanton meet with the black community of Savannah, Georgia.
Sherman issues his Special Field Order 15, setting aside forty-acre plots for black families.
Congress creates the Freedmen’s Bureau in order to establish free labor services for freedmen.
President Johnson decrees that all land in federal hands be returned back to its former owners.
Johnson issues a series of proclamations to reunite the nation, starting Presidential Reconstruction.
Johnson declares that the nation has been reunited in his December address to Congress.
The Thirteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, outlawing slavery within the country.
1866: Sen. Lyman Trumbull proposes an extension of the Bureau and the Civil Rights Act of 1866.
Fisk University, one of the nation’s first black colleges, is founded in Nashville, Tennessee.
Johnson vetoes both bills proposed by Sen. Trumbull, to the surprise of Congress.
Congress passes the Civil Rights Act of 1866 over Johnson’s veto with a supermajority. 
Congress approves the Fourteenth Amendment and sends it to the states for ratification.
A group of Confederate veterans convenes in Pulaski, Tennessee, to found the Ku Klux Klan.
1867: Congress adopts the Reconstruction Act over a veto, dividing the South into military districts.
Congress passes the Tenure of Office Act, barring the president from removing some officeholders.
1868: Johnson, believing the Tenure of Office Act was unconstitutional, removes Sec. of War Stanton.
The House of Representatives drafts articles of impeachment against Johnson following his actions.
Johnson’s lawyers inform moderates that if acquitted, Johnson wouldn’t interfere in Reconstruction.
The Senate impeachment vote fails (35-19 in favor), falling one vote short of conviction.
The Republican Party nominates military hero Ulysses S. Grant at their national convention.
The Democratic Party selects former governor Horatio Seymour as their standard bearer.
The Fourteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, guaranteeing equal legal protections.
Grant and his running mate Colfax defeat Seymour and Blair Jr. (214-80) in the Election of 1868.
1869: Congress passes the Fifteenth Amendment and sends it to the states for ratification.
Ulysses Grant is sworn in as the eighteenth president and delivers his inaugural address.
South Carolina creates a state Land Commission, a program to give land to blacks and poor whites.
1870: The Fifteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, granting suffrage to African-Americans.
Congress passes the first Enforcement Act, outlawing voter discrimination and terror groups.
Georgia becomes the last former Confederate state to be readmitted to the Union.
Hiram Revels of Mississippi becomes the first black Senator in American history.
1871: Congress passes the second Enforcement Act, revising the first with harsher punishments.
Congress passes the third Enforcement Act (a.k.a. the KKK Act), allowing military intervention.
President Grant dispatches federal marshals to arrest hundreds of accused Klansmen.
The Times breaks a story exposing New York City’s corrupt Tweed Ring, led by Sen. William Tweed.
1872: An alienated group of Republicans breaks away and forms the Liberal Republican Party.
The Liberal Republicans nominate Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, for president.
Democratic leaders pounce on the Republican support and back Greeley as their candidate.
Grant wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent Greeley (286-66).
1873: Armed whites assault the town of Colfax, Louisiana, and murder hundreds of former slaves.
The Supreme Court declares that most rights are controlled by states in the Slaughterhouse Cases.
The Supreme Court asserts that free labor principles are male only in Bradwell v. Illinois.
Samuel P. Chase dies, leading to the appointment of Morrison Waite to the post of Chief Justice.
America enters a major crisis following Cooke’s firm’s bankruptcy, beginning the Panic of 1873.
1874: Former slave Blanche K. Bruce of Mississippi becomes the second black Senator ever. 
James S. Pike publishes The Prostrate State, condemning South Carolina’s corruption (and blacks).
The Democratic party makes major gains in the midterms, taking the House of Representatives.
1875: Congress enacts the Civil Rights Act of 1875, outlawing discrimination in public accommodations.
A story is broken revealing the Whiskey Ring scandal involving high-ranking Grant Republicans.
Armed Democrats destroy ballot boxes and drive former slaves from the polls in Mississippi.
1876: The Supreme Court guts the Enforcement Acts by tossing convictions in United States v. Cruikshank.
The nomination of ex-Confederate Wade Hampton for (SC) governor launches a wave of violence.
The Republican Party convenes and nominates Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio for president.
The Democratic Party selects Gov. Samuel J. Tilden of New York as their candidate.
Both parties claim to have carried SC, FL, and LA, creating an election impasse in Congress.
1877: Congress creates the Electoral Commission, whose 8-7 Republican majority elects Hayes.
Rutherford Hayes is sworn in as the nineteenth president and delivers his inaugural address.
Republicans agree to end Reconstruction for Democratic recognition in the Bargain of 1877.
President Rutherford B. Hayes orders away Union troops, ending Reconstruction in the South.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ


1857: Mormons attack a wagon train of settlers moving through Utah in the Mountain Meadows Massacre.


1859: Charles Darwin publishes his famous book On the Origin of Species, establishing evolution theory.


1866: The Atlantic cable opens, making it possible to send telegrams between America and Europe.
1867: Secretary of State William H. Seward purchases Alaska from Russia for $7.2 million.
Critics of the railroads come together to form the Patrons of Husbandry to fight for fair prices.
1868: A Cuban revolt against Spanish rule begins the Ten Years’ War between Cuba and Spain.
1869: President Ulysses S. Grant announces a new “peace policy” with Western Natives, but war resumes.
1870: John D. Rockefeller founds Standard Oil with his business partners and brothers.
1871: Congress eliminates the system by which the government negotiated with Indians as a foreign nation.
The Times breaks a story exposing New York City’s corrupt Tweed Ring, led by Sen. William Tweed.
1872: The New York Sun exposes the Crédit Mobilier scandal, a corrupt government railroad business.
1873: The United States enters a major economic depression during the Panic of 1873.
Andrew Carnegie sets out to create the first “vertically integrated” steel company.
1874: The Women’s Christian Temperance Union is founded at a national convention in Cleveland, Ohio.
1875: Congress passes the Page Act of 1875, banning Chinese women from entering the country.
1876: Gen. George Custer and his 250 men die at the hands of Sioux Indians at the Battle of Little Bighorn.
The Black Hills Gold Rush hits its peak following the discovery of gold in South Dakota two years prior.
1877: Troops commanded by O. O. Howard pursue the Nez Percé on a 1,700 mile chase across the West.
The Great Railroad Strike begins when strikers burn railyards in Pittsburgh after being fired upon.
General strikes paralyze the rail center cities of Chicago and St. Louis, halting national traffic.
President Rutherford Hayes orders federal troops into the North and puts down the strikes by force.
Howard’s troops force the surrender of the Nez Percé and force them into reservations in Oklahoma.


1879: Nez Percé leader Chief Joseph delivers a Washington speech condemning the reservation policy.
An estimated 40-60 thousand Southern blacks migrate to Kansas in the Kansas Exodus.
The United States returns to the gold standard (paper money exchangeable for gold at a fixed rate).
The Bureau of Indian Affairs opens the first Indian boarding school in Carlisle, Pennsylvania.
Henry George publishes Progress and Poverty, suggesting a “single tax” to solve growing squalor.
1880: The first effective Farmers’ Alliance is founded by farm journalist Milton George in Chicago.
1881: President James A. Garfield is shot and eventually dies after an assassination attempt.
1882: Congress passes the Chinese Exclusion Act, banning all Chinese immigration for a ten year period.
1883: Congress passes the Civil Service Act, creating a merit system for the appointment of federal workers.
Low-wage earning Texas cowboys strike for two and half months in the spring for higher pay.
The Supreme Court invalidates the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in the combined Civil Rights Cases.
The major railroad companies divide the United States into four major time zones.
1884: Laurence Gronlund publishes The Cooperative Commonwealth, introducing American socialism.
1885: The California Supreme Court orders San Francisco schools to admit Chinese kids in Tape v. Hurley.
The New York Court of Appeals invalidates a law that prevents cigar manufacturing in tenements.
1886: The Knights of Labor, led by Terence V. Powderly, reaches its peak membership of about 800,000.
On May 1st (or May Day), some 350,000 workers around the country demonstrate for an 8 hour day.
Four strikers are killed by Chicago police during May Day labor protests on May 3rd.
After a bombing in Haymarket Square, panicked police kill innocents and arrest labor leaders.
Eight anarchists, known as the “Haymarket martyrs”, are convicted for the bombing by a jury.
The Student Volunteer Movement for Foreign Missions is founded, inspired by Dwight Moody.
The Statue of Liberty is dedicated in New York Harbor, the tallest man-made structure in the West.
Pro-labor candidate and author Henry George wins 70,000 votes in the race for New York City mayor.
The American Federation of Labor is founded by Samuel Gompers and union leaders in Ohio.
1887: Congress establishes the Interstate Commerce Commission in response to outcries about rail rates.
Congress passes the Dawes Act, breaking up all tribal land into parcels to be given to Indian families.
1888: Edward Bellamy publishes Looking Backward, a fictional tale of socialist ideas and interdependence.
1889: The government opens up two million acres of Indian land from the Dawes Act to white settlers.
Andrew Carnegie publishes his famous article “Wealth”, establishing his idea of the Gospel of Wealth.
1890: Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives, a shocking account of urban poor living conditions.
Alfred T. Mahan publishes The Influence of Sea Power upon History, arguing for a powerful navy.
The National American Woman Suffrage Association is created to reunite suffrage organizations.
Congress passes the Sherman Antitrust Act, banning all practices that restricted free trade.
Congress passes the strongly protectionist McKinley Tariff, shepherded by Rep. William McKinley.
American soldiers kill around 200 Indian Ghost Dancers near Wounded Knee Creek, South Dakota.


1892: Supporters of the Farmers’ Alliance hold a convention and decide to form the Populist Party.
Congress passes the Geary Act, renewing the Chinese Exclusion Act for a further ten years.
Andrew Carnegie and Henry Frick decide to operate their Homestead steel mills on a nonunion basis.
Homestead steel mill workers blockade the steelworks and strike in response to the nonunion policy.
The Populist Party adopts its platform, written by Ignatius Donnelly, at its Omaha convention.
Armed strikers confront private policemen from the Pinkerton Detective Agency and force their retreat.
The governor of Pennsylvania sends in 8,000 militiamen and ends the Homestead strike.
Populist candidate James Weaver receives 8.5% of the popular vote in the Election of 1892.
1893: The United States enters a major economic depression during the Panic of 1893.
A group of American planters rebel and overthrow the Hawaiian government of Queen Liliuokalani.
President Benjamin Harrison submits a Hawaiian annexation treaty to Congress on his last day.
President Grover Cleveland withdraws the proposed Hawaiian annexation treaty from Congress.
The Court authorizes the government to expel Chinese aliens without due process in Fong Yue Ting.
Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld commutes the sentences of the remaining 3 “Haymarket martyrs”.
Colorado enacts women’s suffrage through a popular referendum, granting women the vote.
1894: Governor Davis Waite of Colorado sends the militia in support of striking miners against police.
A band of men led by businessman Jacob Coxey march to Washington protesting unemployment.
The federal government deploys troops to disperse Coxey’s Army from Washington.
Workers in the railroad company town of Pullman, Illinois call a strike to protest a wage reduction.
The American Railway Union announces that its members will refuse to handle Pullman cars.
Attorney General Richard Olney obtains a federal court injunction ordering the strikers back to work.
Federal troops and U.S. marshals are dispatched to occupy rail centers like Chicago and Sacramento.
The Pullman strike collapses when union leaders like Eugene V. Debs are jailed for contempt of court.
The Republican Party gains 117 seats in the House of Representatives during the midterms.
The Immigration Restriction League is founded by a group of professionals near Boston.
Henry D. Lloyd publishes his Wealth against Commonwealth, stating that monopolies ruin liberty.
1895: The Illinois Supreme Court nullifies a state law setting a 48 hour work week for women and children.
The Court rules that the Antitrust Act can’t break up monopolies in United States v. E. C. Knight & Co.
The Cuban War of Independence begins after revolutionaries start uprisings all over the island.
The Court unanimously confirms the Pullman sentences and approves injunction use in In re Debs.
Booker T. Washington delivers his Atlanta Cotton Expo speech urging blacks to accept segregation.
Eugene V. Debs is greeted by a crowd of 100,000 supporters upon his release from prison in Chicago.
1896: The National Association of Colored Women is founded in Washington, D.C. by black activists.
The Court approves state laws requiring separate facilities based on race in Plessy v. Ferguson.
Gold is discovered by prospectors in the Yukon territory, triggering the Klondike Gold Rush in Alaska.
William Jennings Bryan wins the Democratic nomination after his famous “cross of gold” speech.
The Republican Party nominates protectionist Ohio governor William McKinley for president.
Bryan earns the endorsement of the Populist Party and embarks on a national speaking tour.
McKinley and his running mate Hobart defeat Bryan and Sewall (271-176) in the Election of 1892.
1897: Congress passes the Dingley Tariff of 1897, raising tariff rates to the highest level in U.S. history.
1898: An explosion destroys the American USS Maine in Havana Harbor, killing nearly 270 sailors.
Spain rejects an American demand for cease-fire in Cuba and eventual Cuban independence.
The Court rules that American-born Chinese children are citizens in United States v. Wong Kim Ark.
President William McKinley asks Congress for a declaration of war against Spain.
Congress declares war on Spain and passes the Teller Amendment, vowing not to annex Cuba.
American naval forces under Adm. George Dewey defeat a Spanish fleet at Manila Bay, Phillipines.
Philippine leader Emilio Aguinaldo establishes a provisional government based on America.
Opponents of American imperialism form the Anti-Imperialist League at Faneuil Hall in Boston.
The American navy wins another key victory over the Spanish at the Battle of Santiago de Cuba.
American forces led by Theodore Roosevelt’s Rough Riders defeat the Spanish at San Juan Hill.
President William McKinley signs a joint resolution for the American annexation of Hawaii.
The Spanish-American War is ended by the Treaty of Paris 1898 between America and Spain.
Spain cedes the Phillipines, Puerto Rico, and the island of Guam to the United States.
1899: The Philippine-American War breaks out over independence after fighting begins in Manila.
British writer Rudyard Kipling urges America to take up the “white man’s burden” of imperialism.
Plantation laborer Sam Hose is brutally murdered near Newman, Georgia, in front of a large crowd.
Sec. of State John Hay announces the Open Door policy demand to European powers in China.
Thorstein Veblen publishes The Theory of the Leisure Class, criticizing ‘conspicuous consumption’.
1900: Congress passes the Gold Standard Act, defining the dollar by gold weight and setting a gold standard.
Congress passes the Foraker Act, declaring Puerto Rico an ‘insular territory’ and denying statehood.
The Democratic Party nominates William Jennings Bryan on a platform of anti-imperialism.
McKinley wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent Bryan (292-155).
1901: Congress passes the Platt Amendment, authorizing the U.S. to militarily intervene in Cuba.
Congress passes the Spooner Amendment, allowing for a civil government in the defeated Philippines.
Financier J. P. Morgan combines eight steel companies into U.S. Steel, the first billion dollar business.
Congress grants citizenship to 100,000 residents of the Indian Territory in Oklahoma.
The Court rules that the Constitution doesn’t fully apply to the new territories in the Insular Cases.
1902: Congress renews the Chinese Exclusion Act indefinitely, making it a permanent fixture.


1904: The Supreme Court upholds a law banning anarchists from entering the country in Turner v. Williams.
1905: The Court voids a state law establishing a 60 hour work week for bakers in Lochner v. New York.


1910: Congress passes the Mann Act, banning the immoral transportation of women across state lines.


1915: The Supreme Court overturns a Kansas law prohibiting “yellow-dog” contracts in Coppage v. Kansas.
The Supreme Court finds certain “grandfather clauses” unconstitutional in Guinn v. United States.
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ


1872: Yellowstone, located in northern Wyoming, becomes the nation’s first National Park.


1889: Jane Addams founds the Hull House in Chicago, a “settlement house” devoted to helping the poor.
Hazen Pingree is elected mayor of Detroit, vowing to battle business interests dominating the city.


1891: Congress passes the Forest Reserve Act, authorizing the president to withdraw “forest reserves”.
1892: Ellis Island, located in New York Harbor, becomes the nation’s main immigration facility.
John Muir organizes the Sierra Club in San Francisco to help preserve forests from logging.


1894: Pope Leo XIII publishes his encyclical Rerum Novarum, endorsing workers’ rights and cooperation.


1898: Charlotte P. Gilman publishes Women and Economics, arguing that economic independence is key.
1899: The National Consumers League is founded to advocate for working legislation for women & children.
1900: Robert M. La Follette is elected governor of Wisconsin and begins implementing the Wisconsin Idea.
1901: The Socialist Party is formed in Indianapolis by a merger between two large socialist factions.
Anarchist Leon Czolgosz assassinates President McKinley at the Pan-American Expo in Buffalo.
Theodore Roosevelt is sworn in as the twenty-sixth president and delivers his inaugural address.
Roosevelt announces his intentions to prosecute J.P. Morgan’s Northern Securities Company.
President Roosevelt shocks white opinion by inviting Booker T. Washington to the White House.
1902: W. T. Stead publishes The Americanization of the World…, predicting America’s rise as a superpower. 
1903: Colombia refuses to cede land to America for the construction of a canal across the Isthmus of Panama.
President Roosevelt helps incite a Panamanian uprising for independence from Colombia.
America negotiates the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty with Panama, gaining the Canal Zone strip.
W. E. B. Du Bois publishes The Souls of Black Folk, calling for blacks to press for equal rights.
1904: Roosevelt orders American forces to seize indebted customs houses in the Dominican Republic.
The Court orders the dissolution of the Northern Securities Company in Northern Securities Co. v. U.S.
Lincoln Steffens publishes The Shame of the Cities, exposing the profits of corrupt party bosses.
1905: President Roosevelt appoints pro-conservation Gifford Pinchot head of the U.S. Forest Service.
Henry Ford establishes the Ford Motor Company, a small automobile manufacturing firm.
A group of unionists rejecting the AFL’s exclusionist policies form the IWW at a Chicago meeting.
W. E. B. Du Bois gathers a group of black leaders at Niagara Falls and begins the Niagara movement.
President Roosevelt helps negotiate the Treaty of Portsmouth, ending the Russo-Japanese War.
1906: Upton Sinclair publishes The Jungle, grimly describing the country’s unsanitary meat conditions.
Three black men falsely accused of rape are hung and burned in Springfield, Missouri.
Congress passes the Hepburn Act, giving the ICC the power to set reasonable railroad rates.
Congress passes the Pure Food and Drug Act, barring the sale of misbranded/adulterated food.
Congress passes the Meat Inspection Act, ensuring that meat is processed under sanitary conditions.
A small group of black soldiers kill a resident of Brownsville, Texas, and refuse to name the perpetrator.
Roosevelt orders the dishonorable discharge of three black companies after the Brownsville Affair.
The San Francisco school board orders all Asian students confined to an “Oriental School”.
The Japanese government protests, resulting in Roosevelt persuading the city to revoke the order.
Roosevelt dispatches American troops to Cuba to oversee a disputed election, remaining until 1909.
Father John A. Ryan publishes A Living Wage, describing a decent standard of living as a right.
1907: Roosevelt negotiates the Gentlemen’s Agreement, ending Japanese immigration except for relatives.
Indiana passes a law authorizing doctors to sterilize insane and feeble inmates in mental institutions.
1908: The Court upholds a law setting working hours for women due to Brandeis’s brief in Muller v. Oregon.
Henry Ford introduces the Ford Model T, a simple, light vehicle sturdy enough to traverse the country.
President Roosevelt opts not to run for reelection, and handpicks William H. Taft as his successor.
Taft and his running mate Sherman defeat Bryan and Kern (321-162) in the Election of 1908.
Jewish immigrant writer Israel Zangwill’s play The Melting Pot is performed for the first time.
1909: Du Bois joins with reformers to start the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
President Taft appoints former Seattle mayor Richard A. Ballinger to the post of Secretary of the Interior.
Ballinger concludes that Roosevelt had exceeded his authority in placing land in the forest reserves.
Pinchot accuses Ballinger of colluding with wealthy business interests and undoing his work.
Taft lands marines in Nicaragua to protect a government friendly to American economic interests.
Herbert Croly publishes Promise of American Life, proposing Jeffersonian ends by Hamiltonian means.
1910: Taft fires Pinchot after Pinchot’s open rebuke of him, leading to a rift in the Republican party.
Angel Island in San Francisco Bay opens as the main entry point for immigrants from Asia.
Hiram Johnson is elected governor of California, promising to kick Southern Pacific rail out of power.
Johnson secures the passage of California’s Public Utilities Act, a powerful rail regulation law.
1910-1920: The Great Migration of southern blacks to the industrial North occurs.
1911: The Court overturns laws making it illegal for sharecroppers to break contract in Bailey v. Alabama.
A fire breaks out at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company factory in New York City, killing 146 workers.
Six Native American intellectuals gather in Columbus to found the Society of American Indians.
The Court declares Standard Oil a monopoly and breaks it up in Standard Oil Co. v. United States.
The Court orders American Tobacco to end monopolistic pricing policies in U.S. v. American Tobacco Co.
Margaret Sanger begins “What Every Girl Should Know”, a sex ed column in The Call, a socialist paper.
The U.S. Post Office shuts down Sanger’s column after a column on venereal diseases.
Suffragists in California utilize parades, billboards, signs, etc. to advocate for enfranchisement.
California becomes the sixth state to grant women full suffrage rights equal to those of men.
A Mexican revolution lead by Francisco Madero overthrows the government of Porfirio Díaz.
Frederick W. Taylor publishes The Principles of Scientific Management, using study for efficiency.
The U.S. Immigration Commission publishes its Dictionary of Races of Peoples, listing races.
1912: The Massachusetts state legislature begins enforcing a fifty-four hour limit to the workweek.
After employers reduce the pay of laborers, strikers in Lawrence send their children out of the city.
The Sixteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, legalizing the imposition of a graduated income tax.
The governor of Massachusetts intervenes after outrage over the starving children, settling the strike.
Incumbent President Taft wins the Republican nomination over Theodore Roosevelt.
Roosevelt founds the Progressive Party in order to run independently for the presidency.
Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey is nominated at the Democratic national convention.
Wilson and Marshall defeat Roosevelt, Johnson, Taft, Butler, and Debs, Seidel (435-88-8-0).
1913: Mexican military commander Victoriano Huerta kills Madero and seizes power with U.S. backing.
Illinois becomes the first state east of the Mississippi River to allow women to vote for president.
The Seventeenth Amendment is ratified by the states, providing for popular election of senators.
Congress passes the Underwood Tariff, reducing the tariff and imposing an income tax on the top 5%.
Ford’s factory in Highland Park, Michigan adopts the moving assembly line, reforming production.
Congress creates the Federal Reserve System, with a central board to issue money and set rates.
California bans the immigration of all aliens incapable of becoming naturalized citizens (Asians).
1914: Ford raises wages at his factory to a stunning $5 per day, claiming that workers must be consumers.
Wilson orders the landing of American troops at Veracruz to prevent the arrival of Huerta’s weapons.
Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip assassinates Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, Bosnia.
Marcus Garvey founds the Universal Negro Improvement Association for black self-reliance.
Wilson proclaims American neutrality and impartiality at the outbreak of the war in Europe.
Construction of the Panama Canal is completed, reducing the voyage between coasts by 8,000 mi.
Congress creates the Federal Trade Commission to investigate unfair business practices.
Congress passes the Clayton Act, exempting unions from antitrust laws and barring injunction use.
The Lower East Side district of New York City elects socialist Meyer London to Congress.
Margaret Sanger begins openly advertising birth control devices in her journal, The Woman Rebel.
1914-1918: World War 1 occurs, pitting the Allied Powers against the Central Powers.
1915: Wilson hosts the premiere of D. W. Griffith’s film Birth of A Nation, glorifying the Ku Klux Klan.
A German submarine sinks the British liner Lusitania, killing 1,198 people, including 124 Americans.
Wilson sends marines to Haiti after the government refused to let Americans oversee its dealings.
Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan resigns after Wilson’s strong note of protest.
Wilson embarks on his “preparedness” policy, strengthening the army and navy anticipating war.
1916: Dr. Carlos Montezuma creates his newsletter Wassaja and advocates for the abolition of the BIA.
The five-month Battle of Verdun in northeastern France begins, resulting in 600,000 deaths.
Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa leads an attack on Columbus, NM, killing 17 Americans.
Wilson orders American troops under Gen. Pershing to chase and capture Villa, dead or alive.
Germany announces its suspension of submarine warfare against noncombatant ships.
Wilson creates a military government in the Dominican Republic, with U.S. control of debts/customs.
The radical National Women’s Party is founded by British-trained suffragist Alice Paul.
Congress passes the Warehouse Act, giving credit to farmers when they stored crops in federal houses.
Congress passes the Keating-Owen Act, outlawing child labor in the making of goods sold domestically.
Congress passes the Adamson Act, establishing an eight-hour workday on the country’s railroads.
Margaret Sanger opens a clinic in Brooklyn to distributive contraceptive devices to poor women.
Pacifist Jeannette Rankin of Montana becomes the first woman ever elected to Congress.
Wilson wins reelection to the presidency, defeating his opponent Hughes (277-254).
President Wilson cautiously endorses the enfranchisement of women at the national level.
Randolph Bourne publishes his essay “Trans-National America”, envisioning a cosmopolitan society.
Stanford University psychologist Lewis Terman introduces the intelligence quotient (IQ).
1917: Alice Paul and her followers chain themselves to the White House fence, resulting in prison.
American troops are ordered home after failing to capture Villa under Mexican pressure.
Congress passes the Immigration Act, imposing a literacy test & halting migration from parts of Asia.
British spies intercept and publish the Zimmerman Telegram, a message from Germany to Mexico.
The American Protective League is founded by advertising executive A. M. Briggs in Chicago.
The United States purchases the Virgin Islands from Denmark for approximately $25,000,000.
Wilson asks Congress for a declaration of war against Germany following the Zimmerman Telegram.
The war resolution passes both legislatures and America declares war on Germany, entering WWI.
Wilson creates the Committee on Public Information to spread pro-war propaganda messages.
Congress passes the Selective Service Act, requiring 24 million men to register with the draft.
Congress passes the Espionage Act, prohibiting spying, draft interference, and “false statements”.
Dozens are killed during a race riot in East St. Louis, Illinois, after the recruitment of black workers.
10,000 blacks participate in the Silent Protest Parade down Fifth Avenue in New York City.
Wilson creates the War Industries Board to coordinate the purchase and production of war supplies.
Wilson establishes the Food Administration to ensure adequate food supplies without gouging.
Wilson creates the Fuel Agency to ration the country’s coal and oil supplies during the war.
Federal agents raid IWW offices throughout the country, arresting leaders and seizing files.
The October Revolution occurs in Russia, and communists led by Vladimir Lenin take power.
The Court overturns a Louisville zoning regulation on black residences in Buchanan v. Warley.
Lenin and Trotsky publish the Allied secret treaties planning to divide up conquered territories.
Wilson creates the United States Railroad Administration to nationalize the country’s rail transport.
1918: Wilson issues the Fourteen Points, a clear statement of American war aims and international goals.
The deadly Spanish influenza global pandemic breaks out, killing nearly 700,000 Americans.
American forces begin arriving at the French Allied war front in Europe in large numbers.
Russia signs the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Central Powers, ceding land and exiting WWI.
Boston Symphony director Karl Müch is jailed after his inclusion of the works of German composers.
American troops help repulse the Spring Offensive near Paris and join the counteroffensive.
Wilson appoints the War Labor Board to improve working conditions and settle labor disputes.
Congess passes the Sedition Act, making it a crime to make statements scorning the government.
Eugene V. Debs is convicted under the Espionage Act after his anti-war speech in Canton, Ohio.
Millions of Americans under Gen. Pershing push back Germany at the Meuse-Argonne campaign.
Britain and France begin dividing Ottoman territory into a series of Allied-controlled nations.
German Kaiser Wilhelm II is forced to abdicate the throne on November 9, due to internal pressure.
Germany sues for peace with German forces in full retreat and a democratic revolution underway.
President Wilson travels to Versaille, France for peace negotiations to end the war.
1919: The Eighteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, prohibiting the manufacture and sale of liquor.
W. E. B. Du Bois organizes a Pan-African Congress in Paris to press for independence in Africa.
General strikes occur in Belfast, Glasgow, and Winnipeg over promises of “industrial democracy”.
A militant anarchist detonates a bomb at the home of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer.
The Allied Powers and Germany sign the Treaty of Versailles, officially ending WWI.
New European nations are carved out of Germany and czarist Russia’s territorial cessions.
President Wilson bans American black soldiers from participating in the Paris WWI victory parade.
38 people are killed and 500 more injured in a Chicago race riot after the drowning of a black teen.
The Great Steel Strike of 1919 breaks out, uniting some 365,000 workers demanding rights.
President Wilson suffers a severe stroke, leaving him incapacitated for the rest of his term.
A. Mitchell Palmer starts the Palmer Raids after dispatching agents to raid radical organizations.
Congress rejects the Treaty of Versailles amid concerns over the League’s power structure.
1919-1920: The Red Scare takes place, resulting in ~5,000 unwarranted arrests amid fears of communism.
1920: The League of Nations, an international peacekeeper, is created as part of the Treaty of Versailles.
The New York State legislature expels the five Socialist members from their ranks.
The steel strike collapses after the turn of the middle class opinion and violence in Pittsburgh.
The Nineteenth Amendment is ratified by the states, barring the usage of sex as a voting qualification.
The Wall Street bombing occurs when an explosion outside the Stock Exchange kills 40 people.
The Republicans nominate moderate Ohio Senator Warren G. Harding for president.
Harding and Coolidge defeat Cox and F. D. Roosevelt (404-127) in the Election of 1920.
1921: More than 300 blacks are killed and 10,000 left homeless during the Tulsa race riot in Oklahoma.
The Socialist Party finally crumbles under the weight of governmental repression.
Great Britain finally agrees to the creation of the Irish Free State while keeping Northern Ireland.


1925: Alain Locke publishes The New Negro, describing the new vision that black migrants carried.


1927: The Court upholds the legality of insane asylum defective sterilization laws in Buck v. Bell.
Black independence leader Marcus Garvey is deported back to his native Jamaica.